README.md, before:

# minimal-agent

A minimalistic implementation of an LLM agent that can write actions in code to solve tasks.
The focus of this code is on simplicity. The goal is purely educational.

This focus implies tradeoffs. For example, there are fewer validation steps or edge cases covered than one would like to see in a full-blown library. But it pays off. The core `agent.py` module is only ~100 lines long (excluding extensive comments). 

The code demonstrates how easily one can build a simple yet effective LLM agent without the complexity of larger frameworks. It implements the core components necessary for agent functionality - task processing, tool usage, and iterative problem-solving - with minimal abstractions and dependencies.

The agent itself is built from scratch using just a few libraries and extensively commented.

It is inspired by Hugging Face's Smolagents library. Smolagents' python exectutor is also used for the execution of the code generated by the coding agent - but nothing more (see code). It would be too complex and distracting to add this python executor to this repo.

## Usage

### Clone and Install

1. Install [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/) for Python packaging and environment creation.

2. Clone the repo:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Antropath/minimal-agent.git
   cd minimal-agent
   ```

3. Set up your model and API keys:
   
   The repo uses [LiteLLM](https://docs.litellm.ai/) to support a unified interface across all model providers. Create a `.env` file in the `minimal-agent` folder and add the `MODEL` environment variable with the name of the model as specified on LiteLLM, along with the credentials for the corresponding provider.
   
   Example for AWS Bedrock:
   ```bash
   # AWS Bedrock: https://docs.litellm.ai/docs/providers/bedrock
   AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<YOUR-AWS-ACCESS-KEY-ID>
   AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<YOUR-AWS-SECRET-ACCESS-KEY>
   AWS_REGION_NAME=<YOUR-AWS-REGION-NAME>

   MODEL="bedrock/anthropic.claude-3-7-sonnet-20250219-v1:0"
   ```

   Example for Google Gemini:
   ```bash
   # Google Gemini: https://docs.litellm.ai/docs/providers/gemini
   GEMINI_API_KEY=<YOUR-API-KEY>

   MODEL="gemini/gemini-2.0-flash"
   ```

   For other model providers, refer to the [LiteLLM documentation](https://docs.litellm.ai/docs/providers). Note that coding agents require powerful LLMs, such as Claude 3.7 or Gemini 2.0 Flash. While you can use this code with less powerful models, the results might not be great.

4. Run the example:
   ```bash
   uv run run_agent.py
   ```

### Usage Example

The default example runs a query about "the hottest day in 2024 and the Dow Jones value on that day" and provides the agent with the ability to search the internet and visit websites to find the answer.

You can modify the task in `run_agent.py`:
```python
res = agent.run("<Your task here in natural language>")
```

## Philosophy

### Why Not Use Existing Frameworks?

Developers often use complex agent frameworks to address even simple use cases. These frameworks can be convenient for quick implementation but introduce many layers of abstraction that complicate debugging and optimization. This complexity is one reason why agents are frequently perceived as mysterious and developers struggle to productionize them.

### Inspiration from Smolagents

The code draws inspiration from Hugging Face's Smolagents library, which already makes efforts to reduce complexity while providing a framework purpose-built for code agents (i.e. agents that perform actions by writing and executing code). However, even Smolagents be challenging to fully understand or modify its behavior.

### Core Agent Principles

At its essence, an agent only needs to:
1. Receive a task and access appropriate tools
2. Determine how to solve the task using available tools
3. Execute actions based on that reasoning
4. Observe results and iterate until completion

### Practical Considerations

Many agent frameworks add complexity by:
- Abstracting across multiple model providers
- Handling numerous edge cases
- Adding performance-enhancing features (like planning stages)

This can be very useful. The code in this repo might fail for several tasks precisely because it, for example, doesn't address these edge cases for a given set of taks.

However, for specific use cases with very narrow tasks, it's often more effective to start with simpler code like this example and tailor it the requirements rather than adapting a more complex framework.

Commit message:

doc: condensed README; added architecture diagram

README.md, after:

# minimal-agent

A minimalistic implementation of an LLM agent that can write actions in code to solve tasks.
The focus of this code is on simplicity and education: To show that the central idea behing LLM agents is really simple and creating one from scratch is really not rocket science with today's advanced LLMs.

This focus of course implies tradeoffs. For example, there are fewer validation steps, less gracious error handling or edge cases covered than one would like to see in a full-blown production-ready library. But it pays off. The core `agent.py` module is only ~100 lines long (excluding extensive comments). 

The agent itself is built from scratch using just a few libraries and extensively commented. It is, however, inspired by [Hugging Face's Smolagents library](https://github.com/huggingface/smolagents/tree/main).

The code agent needs a controlled and isolated environment to run the code it generates. However, creating such an environment is not really a core AI challenge and building it from scratch here would add little value. For this reason, this repo relies on Smolagents' [local python executor](https://github.com/huggingface/smolagents/blob/main/src/smolagents/local_python_executor.py) for local code execution.

## Usage

### Clone and Install

1. Install [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/) for Python packaging and environment creation.

2. Clone the repo:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Antropath/minimal-agent.git
   cd minimal-agent
   ```

3. Set up your model and API keys:
   
   The repo uses [LiteLLM](https://docs.litellm.ai/) to support a unified interface across all model providers. Create a `.env` file in the `minimal-agent` folder and add the `MODEL` environment variable with the name of the model as specified on LiteLLM, along with the credentials for the corresponding provider.
   
   Example for AWS Bedrock:
   ```bash
   # AWS Bedrock: https://docs.litellm.ai/docs/providers/bedrock
   AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<YOUR-AWS-ACCESS-KEY-ID>
   AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<YOUR-AWS-SECRET-ACCESS-KEY>
   AWS_REGION_NAME=<YOUR-AWS-REGION-NAME>

   MODEL="bedrock/anthropic.claude-3-7-sonnet-20250219-v1:0"
   ```

   Example for Google Gemini:
   ```bash
   # Google Gemini: https://docs.litellm.ai/docs/providers/gemini
   GEMINI_API_KEY=<YOUR-API-KEY>

   MODEL="gemini/gemini-2.0-flash"
   ```

   For other model providers, refer to the [LiteLLM documentation](https://docs.litellm.ai/docs/providers). Note that coding agents require powerful LLMs, such as Claude 3.7 or Gemini 2.0 Flash. While you can use this code with less powerful models, the results might not be great.

4. Run the example:
   ```bash
   uv run run_agent.py
   ```

### Usage Example

The default example runs a query about "the hottest day in 2024 and the Dow Jones value on that day" and provides the agent with the ability to search the internet and visit websites to find the answer.

You can modify the task in `run_agent.py`:
```python
res = agent.run("<Your task here in natural language>")
```

## Agent Architecture

The architecture follows the [ReAct framework](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629). The agent completes its taks in a sequence of steps. In each step it can "Reason" and "Act" (= ReAct). The agent will perform as many steps as needed to complete the task.

So, the core idea is really simple and elegant and `minimal-agent` implements it just like that. Below is the architecture diagram:

![`minimal-agent` architecture](./media/architecture.svg)

Check out `src/minimal_agent/agents.py` to see the corresponding source code.


For a more detail introduction to agents and to understand different levels of AI agents, Hugging Face's [AI Agent Course](https://huggingface.co/learn/agents-course/en/unit1/what-are-agents) is a good start.

Note that many AI agent frameworks (allow to) abstract the ReAct framework. However, the actual call graph is often much more complex because they either added additional capabilities or had to introduce components to make it work in very general scenarios (e.g. more gracious error handling.)

This can be very useful. The code in this repo might fail for several tasks precisely because this is missing.

However, for educational purposes and even for more specific use cases with very narrow tasks, it's more effective to start with simpler code and tailor it to the requirements rather than adapting a more complex framework.
